# The GFTS Use Case

## Introduction

This document describes the Global Fish Tracking System (GFTS) use case
for DestinE Platform. The subject area of the GFTS use case is in marine
biology, the project is performing fish track reconstruction within
biologging science and estimation of future fish habitat conditions
based on sea temperature projections from the Climate Adaptation Digital
Twin.

This document will be continuously updated as we progress in the use
case development. Especially the sections around integration with
DestinE Platform services and the use of DestinE Digital Twin data will
evolve as we advance in implementing the original plan in a
collaborative co-creation approach.

### Actors

There are three main actors in this use case. The three actors have
complementary capabilities that will ensure a successful use case
development. The three partners are responsible for the end-user
perspective, infrastructure development, and interface implementation.
The end-user of the system are researchers that perform fish track
reconstruction science.

The end-user is represented by the [Institut Fran√ßais de Recherche pour
l\'Exploitation de la Mer](https://www.ifremer.fr) (IFREMER). IFREMER is
a consortium partner of the GFTS project. This institute is at the
forefront of fish track research and has contributed to the definition
of this use case from the proposal writing stage. They will use the GFTS
as a platform for advancing their fish tracking modeling.

For infrastructure development and deployment the project has the
[Simula Research Laboratory](https://www.simula.no/) (SRL) as a
consortium partner. Simula is a research laboratory that performs
high-quality information and communication technology research. It is
the perfect partner for ensuring a highly scalable fish track
reconstruction environment that IFREMER will rely on.

To create a decision support tool the project has [Development
Seed](https://developmentseed.org/) as a consortium partner. Development
Seed is a pioneering technology company specializing in data
visualization, mapping, and software development for social good,
recognized for its innovative use of geospatial data to empower
organizations and governments worldwide. Development Seed is also the
lead of the project.

## Use Case Description

Our use case has two main components, one is a modeling environment for
fish track reconstruction, and the other is a decision support tool to
explore future habitat conditions for fish species based on the
reconstructed tracks.

### Fish track modeling environment

The modeling environment addresses a need from the scientific community
to have a consistent way of running fish track reconstruction at scale.
Currently, scientists that have biologging data from in situ
measurements have to perform fish track reconstruction on their own
local machines. Fish track reconstruction is a highly resource intensive
process. It requires access to large datasets of sea temperature
profiles along time and space, as well as a high number of computing
power to run the models. This is a limitation for biologists who are
specialized in marine biology and biologging from in-situ fish tagging.
These scientists may not have the knowledge of creating and maintaining
scalable computing environments for fish track reconstruction.
Furthermore, the ocean temperature data used for fish track
reconstruction is shared across different modeling efforts for different
species. A modeling environment that combines data availability with
computational resources will significantly lower the barriers for
biologists to perform fish track reconstruction. This is a clear value
added when compared to the current workflow that biologists use for fish
track reconstruction.

Our use case will therefore add value by creating a ready to use
environment for fish track reconstruction from biologging data. This
environment will be made available to scientists that are limited in
their current workflow, reducing the barrier of entry for this kind of
scientific analysis, and increasing the uptake of ocean temperature data
created in the DestinE project and the DestinE Platform environment.

#### Preconditions

The first precondition for using the fish track modeling environment is
familiarity with the pangeo-fish software and fish track reconstruction
techniques. The model environment will be a ready-to-use development
environment, but the user will still be expected to be an expert in fish
track reconstruction. The environment is meant to relieve the burden of
infrastructure management for users that know how to run models in
notebooks.

A second precondition for using this system is the availability of
biologging data. The system does not provide the biologging data itself.
A user of the system will have to provide this data and upload it to the
system prior to start modeling.

A third precondition is availability of computing resources. The DestinE
Platform infrastructure will provide the underlying infrastructure. The
requirements on the size of the computing resources will depend on the
amount of biologgin data that is available (how many species, how many
observation points, for how many dates), as well as the resolution of
the ocean temperature data used for reconstruction. Here the higher the
better, each user will choose the best available data for the region
where the biologing data was collected and the time range for which it
is available.

#### Input summary

The inputs for this system are biologging data from fish species on the
one hand, and ocean temperature on the other hand. The biologging data
needs to be provided by the user, whereas the ocean temperature data
will be available through the DestinE Platform data lake. This is one of
the key advantages of this system, that the big data requirements for
this kind of modeling are readily available through the DestinE
Platform.

#### Output summary

The outputs of the fish track modeling environment are the reconstructed
fish tracks. These are georeferenced fish locations with dates attached
to them, as well as daily posterior distributions of fish position.
These represent daily maps of fish presence probability. These fish
tracks and location probabilities are stored within the GFTS system and
can be integrated into the decision support system in a later step. The
presence probability can be aggregated over time intervals such as
spawning periods and individual fishes to help managers designing
spatial management measures.

#### Workflow description

The high level workflow for using this system is to register on the
platform. To control the type and level of usage of the platform, users
will be able to join the GFTS platform by invitation only in the first
iteration. After registration and login, the user will have access to a
Jupyter environment that will scale on demand. The user will then upload
their biologging data, perform modeling and store the output of the
modeling in secure and long term cloud storage.

### Future conditions decision support tool

Fish track reconstruction is a significant first step in better
understanding fish populations in the oceans. However, the fish tracks
themselves are not enough for decision makers to derive actionable
insights for improving marine life protection and design fisheries
policies.

The second part of the GFTS project is therefore to leverage the fish
tracks and combine them with long term ocean temperature forecasts from
the DestinE Climate Adaptation Digital Twins. We will calculate the
future conditions of these fish track locations relying heavily on
DestinE Digital Twin data and the core functionalities of the DestinE
Platform. Ocean condition variables from the climate adaptation Digital
Twin forecasts will be crossed with reconstructed fish tracks using the
scalable DestinE Platform. Example variables for these calculations are
sea temperature and salinity.

This integration will enable us to evaluate a range of potential
scenarios. These "what-if" scenarios will depict how variations in
climate conditions could impact the quality of habitat for fish species
based on the estimated fish track locations.

#### Preconditions

The precondition for providing the decision support tool for any fish
species, is its previous completion of fish track reconstruction in the
modeling environment. Once fish tracks are available, the system can
integrate them and create what-if scenarios based on long term climate
projections.

Another precondition is the existence of detailed data from the
different Climate Adaptation Digital twin models, ideally under
different climate scenarios. These are required to compute the what-if
scenarios that analyze the future conditions that fish will meet in
their current location.

#### Input summary

The input for the decision support system are the fish tracks, and
future projections of ocean temperatures. With these two inputs,
scenarios will be computed and made available to the user.

#### Output summary

The output of the decision support system are maps and graphs of future
habitat conditions for the species at hand. The system will expose the
what-if scenarios to the end user through an intuitive interface.
Outputs are the graphical representation on the interface, as well as
potentially options to export the underlying data.

#### Workflow description

The decision support system will be publicly available. The workflow
begins therefore with accessing the tool though a browser. The user can
then explore different scenarios for the available species in the
interface. The detail of how this interaction will look like will be
part of a co-creation process with our initial users and the development
team.

### Application to Seabass

To demonstrate the capabilities of the GFTS system, we will focus on
Seabass, a species that has been studied by our scientific team for
decades. We will leverage an extensive fish track biologging dataset
that IFREMER has collected from 2010 onwards. The dataset is for Seabass
along the French Atlantic coast.. The combination of this dataset with
the Climate Adaptation Digital Twin will allow us to develop a fully
fledged usage of the GFTS infrastructure and demonstrate the
functionality of the system. If data availability allows, we will also
add other fish species such as Pollock to the analysis to demonstrate

### Expected outcome

We expect the outcome of this project to support both the scientific
community and policy makers in the space of marine biology and marine
area protection. In a fast changing world it is important to ensure that
scientists have the tools to scale their scientific methods to regional
and global levels, so that the large-scale implications of scientific
insights can be estimated. Once data and insights are generated, it is
equally important to ensure that policy makers have access to this data
in a way that is useful for them to maximize the positive outcome of the
scientific output.

In the GFTS project we address the needs of the scientists and the
policy makers at the same time. For this, we build a scalable fish track
reconstruction environment for biologging experts on the one hand, and
help marine protection policy making by estimating impact of climate
change on fish habitat conditions on the other hand. We hope this will
contribute to an increased understanding of fish movement in our seas as
well as some of the implications of climate change on fish populations
based on the known fish movements.

The table below lists institutes that expressed interest in using the
GFTS system for fish track analysis.

| **Institute**                                                                 | **Species** | **Location** |
| ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------- | ------------ |
| Swedish University of Agricultural Science                                    | Shark       | Sweden       |
| Universidade do Algarve                                                       | \-          | Portugal     |
| Dalhousie University                                                          | \-          | Canada       |
| Flanders Marine Institute                                                     | \-          | Belgium      |
| Nihon University College of Bioresource Sciences Department of Marine Science | \-          | Japan        |
| Centre d'Etudes Biologiques de Chiz√©                                          | \-          | France       |
| Institute of Marine Research                                                  | \-          | Norway       |

### Uncertainty

Our approach quantifies uncertainties using hidden Markov models to
derive the posterior probability of the sequence of fish positions, from
which by-products are derived as mean, maximum and most probable fish
trajectories. Appropriate ocean temperature and pressure datasets
together with biologging in-situ datasets are used to estimate fish
habitats, along with sensitivity analysis for a range of outcomes. The
developed interactive tools offer end-users the ability to generate
probabilistic predictions and explore different scenarios. Sensitivity
analysis identifies key uncertainties and their impact on decisions,
while expert judgment complements limited data. Subsequently,
policy-making prioritizes robust strategies to design fish conservation
areas.

## Architecture

The technical framework of this proposal is based on the Pangeo
ecosystem, which facilitates co-creation and solution development. An
interactive and scalable Pangeo computing infrastructure will be
deployed to provision the resources required for running the pangeo-fish
model. We will connect all available and relevant ocean temperature and
pressure datasets of DestinE using Pangeo techniques such as Intake,
STAC and kerchunk. Then, in consultation with IFREMER's Ocean Physics
scientist, additional datasets from IFREMER such as OSI-SAF datasets,
and Copernicus marine services will be connected to the Pangeo DestinE
Platform.

The following diagram shows an overview of what data is used as input,
what data is being generated, and how this information feeds into the
decision support tool.

### Co-design

The co-creation process developed within the [e-shape
project](https://e-shape.eu/index.php/co-design) will be adopted to
ensure that all stakeholders are engaged and their needs are addressed.
We will employ co-creation as a collaborative process where stakeholders
and end-users actively engage in the creation of the GFTS platform. We
are planning to reach out to potential users and help them to

1.  Use the GFTS system and pangeo-fish software to run fish track
    reconstruction
2.  Include their existing fish track data in the decision support tool
3.  Explore early versions of the decision support tool and get feedback
    on how to advance

To achieve this, we will set up online workshops, interviews, and
training sessions where relevant. The goal of these activities will be
for the new users and stakeholders to become familiar with the GFTS
system and be able to use it for their own purposes.

In general, we will encourage all participants to openly share ideas,
and to joint decision-making to generate an innovative and tailored
outcome for GFTS. By integrating diverse perspectives, knowledge, and
experiences, our co-creation process will ensure a solution that is more
relevant, usable, and sustainable. This approach fosters a sense of
ownership and commitment among stakeholders, leading to an outcome that
better meets the needs and preferences of everyone involved.

### DestinE Platform integration

This section contains the specification of how we will integrate with
DestinE Platform at a high level. The integration plan details will
evolve as we get onboarded to the DestinE Platform in practice. We will
document the process of the integration of our use case into DestinE
Platform in our public GitHub repository. Documenting our learnings as
part of the first cohort of DestinE Platform users will hopefully help
future use cases and other future DestinE Platform users to integrate
their project with DestinE Platform easier and faster.

We will leverage the DestinE Platform wherever possible, from
authentication, to existing Kubernetes clusters, object storage, and
more. The use case will be made available to selected DestinE users and
integrated in the DestinE Platform system native capabilities. The
selected DestinE users can make use of the data available on the DestinE
Platform, the DestinE data lake, and from the DestinE Digital Twins.
Authorized users will be able to run the tools & services developed
within the Use Case.

Interactive dashboards will be built based on Jupyter and Pangeo
technologies such as Voila dashboards, Jupyterlite or Observable
community notebooks. For the development phase, Pangeo JupyterHub with
Dask cluster would be deployed on the DestinE Platform.

## Planning and Strategy

### Scalability Plan

We will build a scalable infrastructure from day one. The pangeo
deployment will be based on Kubernetes and have an auto-scaling feature
that will add more capacity to the infrastructure on demand as usage
increases. Our service will rely on the ability of the DestinE Platform
to provide the necessary resources to our Kubernetes cluster. The
processing we use for the Seabass species will be a great scale test, as
it is one of the larger existing biologging datasets in the world.

### Long Term Strategy

Our long term strategy is to create a decision support tool that
supports decision making around fish stocks around the globe. We believe
that this requires the ability to estimate and map fish locations,
primarily focused on biologging data, but with the vision of extending
to other sources that indicated potential fish habitat. This is why the
GFTS system has two main components: the fish track reconstruction
environment, and the decision support tool.

The fish track reconstruction itself is an expensive analysis and will
require funding for data analysis on demand using a case by case basis.
The fish track reconstruction environment is not freely accessible and
we will only scale up for the resource intensive processes if there is
funding for such additional analysis. When no processing is being
performed, the environment will only require minimal resources.

The decision support tool will be kept online in the medium term. Also
this system is expected to have low resource utilization. New data from
additional analysis will only be integrated into the decision making
tool when the fish track reconstruction mechanism is deployed for
additional processing as described above.

### Traceability

We are using ORCID IDs for all the work published under the GFTS
project. We are also publishing the source code and the relevant
documentation in the public [DestinE_ESA_GFTS GitHub
repository](https://github.com/destination-earth/DestinE_ESA_GFTS). The
documentation will be integrated into the codebase and published in a
rendered version in a separate [url for
documentation](https://destination-earth.github.io/DestinE_ESA_GFTS/).

All the software developed within the project will be licensed through
the Apache 2 OSI license and will be made available in Github. All
developments will be done in the GitHub repository linked below and
software releases will get a DOI in Zenodo to increase the Findability,
Availability, Interoperability and Reusability (FAIR) of all the
software components. FAIR [Research
Objects](https://www.researchobject.org) (ROs) will be created using the
[RoHub](https://reliance.rohub.org), a Research Object Management
platform in order to align with Open Science principles such as the
practice of sharing inputs, outputs, models, software, workflows,
brochures, training, and any other publication during the active phase
of the project.

Link to public GitHub repository:
<https://github.com/destination-earth/DestinE_ESA_GFTS>

Link to documentation website:
<https://destination-earth.github.io/DestinE_ESA_GFTS/>

The use of commercial software is not foreseen. All the technologies are
based on the Jupyter and Pangeo ecosystem that are widely adopted
standard-based technologies enabling interoperability of DestinE
components with external systems and guaranteeing compliance with
standards indicated in DestinE Platform.

### Use case associations

This section we will document any associations with other DestinE
Platform use cases. There are no other use cases associated with the
GFTS use case at the moment.

### Use Case Notes

This section will contain any additional notes and information on the
use case that users need to be aware of while using the suggested
workflow. There are no additional use case notes at the moment.

### Implementation Plan

- WP1: Management
  - Task 1: Daniel Wiesmann (DS)
- WP2:
  - Task 2: Technology, Benjamin Ragan-Kelley (SRL)
  - Task 2: Science, Tina Odaka (IFREMER);
- WP3:
  - Task 3: Tina Odaka (Ifremer)
- WP4:
  - Task 4: User experience, Mathieu Woillez (IFREMER);
  - Task 4: Technology, Daniel Wiesmann (DS)
